These companies really need to focus on
what potentially could happen beyond the
next two and a half, three years. The
new administration comes in and the
rules change completely. So you can't
turn a blind eye to EVs.
>> Hi everyone, welcome to WSJ's Take on
the Week. I'm Gunjen Bannery
>> and I'm Telus Demos.
>> Tell us the big thing I've been watching
this week is PERPS crypto perpetual
futures. Pers. Not like criminals per
[laughter] not that kind of perpetual
futures.
>> Perpetual futures.
>> You got to catch me up.
>> You know, if crypto buying and selling
Bitcoin, Ethereum is not volatile enough
for you, these are a way to amp up the
risk even more. They're basically
turbocharged bets on Bitcoin. 10x
returns, 20x returns.
>> Over what time period? Like a day.
>> It can. Yes, exactly.
>> You can make 10x in a day doing this.
>> You can. So basically these are these
are
>> needs a casino really.
>> Well I think I think that's the big
thing right is these have entered the US
market for the first time this year
>> and I think mainstream brokerages are
going to look to amp up the risk even
more like these have been really popular
bets abroad around 70% of Bitcoin
trading volumes occurred in perpetual
futures this year so they are you know
one of the most popular trades on the
planet definitely the most popular way
to bet on Bitcoin. I know that say
Bitcoin again has been trading like
gold. People see it as an alternative to
the US dollar as a way to protect
themselves from inflation, right? That's
one view of Bitcoin. I'm sure there are
many. Economic data can drive that,
right? Something that you see as an
inflationary piece of news. Maybe that
drives up the the price of Bitcoin. So,
are people trading around like data
releases? Is there is there a certain
time or pattern into when people are
putting on 20x bets? I've got 30 minutes
to see this thing through.
>> I think it's speculation. It's it's
truly speculation. A lot of it is
gambling, right? Of course, there's
professional traders doing this to maybe
hedge, but there's also retail traders.
You know, Coinbase brought them to the
US for the first time. Robin Hood
introduced its European clients to per
recently. So, I think you're going to
see these expand and I think you're
going to see leverage increase here. And
you might see you might see more of your
friends or or co-workers trading these
things because brokerages are are likely
going to expand access here.
>> Well, to the extent that any of those
folks are data driven, there's a big
piece of data upcoming this week that
they could tune into and that is the
September jobs report. The last few jobs
reports obviously have been fireworksy.
Not just the reports themselves, but the
revisions to past reports. So perhaps
that's what people will be most focused
on. What are the revisions? I will say
that the Chicago Fed uh led by our URSTW
guest uh Austin Goulby, the Chicago uh
Fed president, they've launched a new
series of indicators uh that are meant
to study what is known about the job
market and predict the future moves. And
what their current forecast for the
September report is is that the
unemployment rate will be unchanged at
4.3%.
But the unemployment rate isn't really
the whole story with the job market
these days.
>> What do you think is the whole story?
>> What a lot of our colleagues in the
journal have been writing in our recent
economics coverage is that the
percentage-based measures of the job
market that is not the number of jobs
created or lost from month to month, but
the percentage based numbers like the
unemployment rate might be impacted by
immigration policy. If a lot of people
are leaving the country, if we are
shrinking the supply of workers in the
US, that means that even if the US
economy isn't creating a lot of jobs,
maybe even it's losing jobs, you could
still see the unemployment rate looking
healthy.
>> I thought Powell made a really
interesting point about this in the last
Fed meeting where he pointed to kind of
this curious balance, right? You're
seeing exactly the words he used.
>> Yeah. You're seeing supply down and
you're seeing demand down. So, it seems
like we're at a fragile moment in terms
of employment
>> and I think it's going to raise very
interesting questions about what is a
recessionary indicator and what isn't.
>> Tell us, you follow what's going on with
credit cards and spending pretty
closely. What are we seeing there?
>> You still haven't seen a huge change in
the way people are using their credit
cards. things that measure how indebted
people are, the percentage of their
credit lines they're utilizing, the
average household debt, the average
credit card debt per household. Those
things haven't moved anywhere close to
what we would think of as like really
scary territory. And I'm talking like
pre208 financial crisis type stuff. You
see pockets of people who aren't paying
off their debts at the same pace they
were before. There have been times when
the number of people, the percentage of
people making the minimum payment has
risen, but I don't think that we really
see a huge drop off in credit card
spending.
>> And what about auto loans? People still
paying those off.
>> There are some flashing red lights in
the auto market. Uh there have been some
troubles for what I think people in the
industry would call like deep subprime
auto lenders. That is people absolute
riskiest borrowers.
>> Some people think of that as a canary in
the coal mine. Wow. Could this kind of
filter up to the the bigger part of the
market?
>> Other people look at that and say,
"Look, it's the deep subprime part of
the market." Like, as as somebody once
said to me, and I say this all the time,
>> people in that credit bucket are always
living in a recession. They're at risk
of losing their job. They're not making
a lot of money. They're struggling to
borrow. You know, that's that's just
what life is like, unfortunately. I
think the big thing really happening in
the auto market right now is something
that's been a bedrock of the industry
for a long time, which is the end of the
$7,500 tax credit that you get for
purchasing an electric vehicle. That is
set to expire now at the end of
September on September 30th.
>> That was a big reason my parents got an
electric vehicle. That's for sure.
>> And it's been a big reason people have
been buying electric vehicles lately.
Just consider these numbers, right? The
average transaction price for a new EV
was a little over $55,000. That's a
Kelly Blue Book number that our
colleagues at Barren wrote about.
Consumers using the credit though would
have paid around $48,000. Oh, a big
discount, right? The average transaction
price for all new cars, so that would
include your intern internal combustion
engine or ICE vehicles, you know,
traditional regular car, uh that would
have been around $48,000. So, basically
without the credit, EVs are going to be
more expensive.
>> Oh, wow. And so to help us kind of find
a point on the horizon to focus on, we
spoke with John Murphy. He was a
longtime stock analyst covering the
automotive sector for Bank of America.
He recently took on a new role at HEG
Partners, and he'll be advising uh
dealers and other companies in the auto
space on consolidation and other big
trends happening in the market. And we
had a really interesting conversation
earlier this week about the end of the
EV tax credit and what a future might
look like for automakers. I'm excited
for this one.
>> It's a great conversation and we're
going to play it right after the break.
>> All right, welcome back. We're here with
John Murphy. He is a managing director
in strategic advisory at HEG Partners.
John, welcome to the show.
>> Thanks for having me. Looking forward to
it.
>> We're on the cusp of some big changes in
the auto market. There's a lot going on
and there's one in particular that um I
want to start with. We are now basically
in the final days of the $7,500
tax credit that has gone to uh electric
vehicle purchases and that's been a big
support for the market for a long time.
And as my Wall Street Journal colleagues
recently put it, um the Trump
administration is basically in the
process of dismantling tailpipe
emissions and fuel economy rules that
long underpin the production and sale of
the vehicles. So, even beyond the tax
credits there, how big of a deal is the
end of the $7,500 tax credit?
>> It's a very big deal in in many ways.
First and foremost, when we look at EV
penetration, last year was about 8%. Uh
first few months of this year, it's kind
of ramped up because people were
anticipating the end of uh these EV
credits. But the reality is once that
drops off, we're going to look at we're
probably going to see something far
below 10%, 8%, and probably just a few
percent. Uh because for a lot of folks
in the country, it's a subpar product at
a higher price. Simply over time, um if
you can bring the cost of a of an EV
down and ramp up the charging network
and create a better product at a better
price, I think people will move in that
direction. But we have not gotten there
yet in in the auto industry in the
United States. And we are probably a
very long way off from actually making
that work.
>> And so what does that mean for the
pipeline of products coming out of
automakers? I mean, I think we're used
to seeing EVs as some of the most
anticipated launches of new cars and
things like that. EV focused companies
like Teslas have been big winners, but
even when looking at, you know, the big
traditional automakers, your Fords and
General Motors, their EV prospects um
were really central. How do we think
about them in a world in which the EV
maybe isn't
seen as the growth engine as much? So,
um, it's a great question because it's
it's turned the industry on its head
because for the last few years, there
was such a heavy push towards investing
in EV technology and product development
dollars or PD dollars being spent on on
EVs. What we're seeing now is the front
end of the curve of cancellation of some
of these major programs. Ford's three
row uh, EV that they they canceled last
year was a $2 billion charge. We're
going to see a lot more of those coming.
So, what it's done is it's really
created a lot of wasted capital to be
honest. um a lot of heads scratching as
to how to handle an eventuality that's
going to have a significant you know
penetration of EVs over time but
holistically what's happened is you
traditionally have about 45 new models
that are launched each year roughly
right um this year we're going to see
less than 30 next year you know maybe
we're getting back to 35 to 40 so
there's a real hole um in in what's
coming to market and you know that could
put some real pressure on uh demand and
pricing because it's those brand new
vehicles that bring people into
showrooms. So, you got to get people
really confident um and excited about
that new product.
>> What What does the EV business look like
without this tax credit? I mean, it
doesn't go away, but but how does it
change it?
>> We used to have a market that was call
it a 16 to 17 million US market that had
um a consistent powertrain. Now, we have
multiple powertrains, ice, regular
hybrid, plug-in hybrid, and EVs. So now
you have an extreme fragmentation of the
most expensive part of the vehicle and
that's going to put pressure on profits
and returns over time unless you can
drive significant scale. But you can't
drive the same kind of scale because now
we're chopping up the market uh into
four separate power trains. That's going
to be a real challenge uh over time and
it's something that you know we all need
to really really think about um you know
in the pricing side meaning that
automakers are going to have to continue
to push pricing a little bit higher to
pay for this which then puts even more
pressure on the affordability issue
because it makes vehicles more expensive
and makes you know the question of
affordable transportation which is a
pillar of the economy which often gets
overlooked um that much tougher to
solve. The Journal recently tabbed up,
you know, estimates of losses from
tariffs for global automakers at like 12
billion. But, you know, if these same
companies are going to be, some of them
are going to be dialing back in EVs,
right? I mean, here's just one number,
for example, uh, from a recent story.
Ford says it will save $1.5 billion on
emissions credits that that it uses to
offset other uh, vehicles that it makes
that it won't have to be doing anymore.
Is there a financial upside to some of
these businesses uh from from what's
going on
>> as you look at this that you know that
number from Ford is a point estimate on
on on savings not necessarily also
including the potential higher sales you
may have on some of these larger ICE ice
IC ice vehicles that they make
tremendous amounts of money on the
entire the F- series including the 250
and 350 is almost the entire um profit
pool at at Ford. So, if they can sell
more of those and make more money uh in
the near term, yes, it's a it's a huge
boost potentially to profit. Uh there's
other things that are going on in um the
regulatory environment, the tax
environment that really needs to be
taken in account. But these companies
really need to focus on what potentially
could happen beyond the next two and a
half, three years. The new
administration comes in and the rules
change completely. So, you can't turn a
blind eye to EVs. So you have to think
about really leveraging your core
business and that's in trucks. It's
building up that capital on your balance
sheet to deal with the uncertainty of
all these regulatory environments, the
you know eventuality of some autonomous
vehicles and the eventuality of Chinese
competition so that you're in a really
stalwart position on your balance sheet
and your capital structure to invest and
deal with with deal with these
uncertainties going forward.
>> We, you know, read a lot about Chinese
automakers like BYD, right? They're
growing fast in, you know, uh, Europe,
the Middle East, um, you know, Mexico,
Latin America.
Will investors be excited about a
company that is essentially has mastered
the US market and makes vehicles for the
US market, but isn't necessarily in the
global conversation? Would investors
want a business like that?
>> I've been involved in the auto industry
for almost 30 years. and and a and a
very significant rule that's existed for
you know decades is the only place that
automakers really make significant
amounts of money is in the North
American truck business and global
luxury. So when you look at what's going
on with the Chinese manufacturers, it's
maybe making sort of the global mass
market that much tougher and potentially
worse to be invested in, but it is not a
place where you've ever really made any
money and over time you've probably lost
a tremendous amount of money. So, I
think that what's going on right now is
everybody needs to be even more diligent
about where they're making money, which
they've not had the greatest discipline
historically, but it's mission critical
that they do it now and recognize that
the D3 are North American truck
businesses that
>> potentially have an opportunity. The D3,
the big the Detroit, Detroit, GM, Ford,
and Stalantis. So they have potentially
this this real opportunity to leverage
that transition and really build their
luxury brands cuz they have some really
good product that could compete not just
in in the US but but globally. Uh and
recognize they were never making much
money if any at all in the mass market
and now the Chinese are coming in and
making it that much worse. But what you
have to recognize is that you can have a
smaller company that that is more
profitable, but not only do they have to
love the internal combustion engine
vehicles, they need to love their
customers and their business partners on
the dealership side because that is
where there's this huge profit pool that
for some reason just doesn't really get
recognized. I mean, I would estimate
that G and Ford on an ongoing basis are
doing about 20% of their operating
profit or EBIT in aftermarket parts.
Investors don't know that, right? I mean
they don't recognize that the companies
don't talk about it in a segmentation
basis but that is a huge opportunity for
them to massively increase um their
profitability because they're not
playing in the life cycle of the vehicle
much beyond the first 3 years and even
in the first 3 years their dealers and
the automakers are penetrating less than
half of the potential parts and service
revenue and profit. Looking from the
stock market's point of view, um it
seems like investors maybe are already
kind of thinking along those lines,
right? You've got some surprising
performance this year. GM is up um 11%
uh as of this recording. Ford is up 17%.
I mean, Volkswagen is up 12%. Tesla uh
is has rallied back a little bit. It's
now up 8% for the year, but it was down
as much as 15%, you know, just a few
weeks ago. And for perspective, the S&P
500 is only up 13%. So, so you know,
automakers are are more in tune with
with this this kind of bull market. Do
you think that's what investors might be
thinking about is like through all of
the mess of what's going on right now,
right? You have big changes. You have
tariffs. You have changes in incentives
in EVs and are they looking at those
domestic automakers and saying, "Boy,
there's actually the potential for a
refocus on like the core profitable
business."
>> I think there's a an increasing
understanding that that's where they're
making the money. the companies are
focusing on that. But I also think what
they're what they're finding is they are
having very good discipline on
production and matching supply with with
demand which is resulting in pricing
that is remaining far more resilient
than anybody has has been expecting.
>> Pricing you mean the prices they charge
to consumer?
>> Pricing they're charging the consumers
because they're they're keeping a
relative lid on supply. Their dealers uh
have inventory that are closer to
normal, right? So they're not super
short, but they're not getting into
excess positions, which means uh the
consumer wants a vehicle uh and they
want a certain vehicle. They're going to
have to pay what is, you know, the
market price, which is a price that is
good for profits through the value
chain. It's good for the automakers.
It's good for the dealers. Um and
ultimately, in an odd way, it's
reasonably good for the consumer because
their trade-in value or the residual
value is holding up. So the equity in
their vehicle is actually stronger. So
when they go to buy a new vehicle,
they're in a better position. So
managing pricing through the a spectrum
of a vehicle actually can be uh a good a
good guy or good factor for everybody
that's involved.
>> Yeah. General Motors said something
interesting. GM said that it expects
consistent pricing uh to offset about
10% of its tariff costs this year. Is
that is that what you're talking about?
>> That's definitely what I'm talking
about. And this is something we've all
been, you know, kind of pushing the
automakers to really really focus on.
And it really took COVID uh in the
supply chain shock after it to really
kind of force this experiment upon the
industry where you're short of supply of
of parts. So you have to make the
product that is sort of the highline
product, the high trim product and focus
on keeping price high. And they were
forced into this this um this
experiment. It's getting a little bit
wonky. There's something called the
Lrangeian profit maximization equation.
It simply means if you're you know if
you take your marginal price down, you
might drive a lot more units and your
total profit might go up. The problem in
the auto industry, if you look at that
sort of at first blush, is you end up
killing your pricing and it hurts your
residual values, which then eventually
comes back in whipsaws. And then all of
a sudden, your new vehicle pricing is
getting hit even worse and you're caught
in in kind of this death spiral on
pricing. And now what you're seeing is a
more stable environment in pricing,
which once again is good for the
automakers and their profits, but is
actually not too bad for the consumer on
a holistic basis.
>> A lot of investors have been shifting
their focus globally. And so as people
do that, as they think maybe more
globally in their portfolio
and they're thinking about, you know,
the end of sort of EV credits here in
the US, do you think it makes sense for
people to start thinking about, you know
what, maybe I want to move some of my
money into kind of global automakers
because, you know, maybe they're they
are focused on that mass market, global
EV market, and I I really still think
that's the future. You know, as an
investor, how do you think they should
think about, you know, US automakers
versus global ones? what's what's the
right way to go about that?
>> I think what is going on right now is
something akin to saw what we saw in the
2030s and 40s here in the United States,
but it's happening on a global basis.
So, I remember a long time ago being the
Walter P. Chrysler Museum. Um, and there
was this great, you know, chart of
dozens of US companies and how over time
they consolidated down to largely the D3
and then some of the, you know, now now
the imports. What you're looking at is
something very similar on a global basis
right now is you kind of look at China
and you have over a hundred you know
automakers and you're like okay let's
start the list and like figure out how
that's going to consol consolidate over
time but that's not limited to the
Chinese market because these companies
are global. So every incumbent has to
understand that they are in this new
pool that is going to consolidate over
time and it's foolish to think because
you're just in the US or you're you know
you're doiciled in the US or doiciled in
Europe or you're doiciled in Korea or
doiciled in Japan that you're not going
to have to deal with that consolidation
as well. The thing to also remember is
that governments do get involved in
committing capital to this industry and
as an investor that kind of makes it
challenging because you have all these
fundamental factors to think think about
but then you kind of have these um
incentives and regulatory you know
issues that you know that are set up to
favor the home team in some ways. So
it's a really challenging uh way to make
money. Um I do think there's probably
going to be some really big winners.
There's probably a lot of money to be
made in the global automaker side.
suppliers I think are very interesting
and I think the dealers um are probably
the easiest way um and most reliable way
to make money as as an investor. Um you
know there's public stocks right now but
mostly it's private. Uh and if you were
to look through the value chain, the
consistency of earnings and returns over
time, you can bet on all these, you
know, these big players and who's going
to win win win or lose there, which is
very interesting and intellectually
challenging and a lot of fun as an
analyst to look at. Or you can get sort
of to somewhat the more simpler um
interface with the consumer where
there's a lot of money that could be
made over over time as well. So I think
there's a you know there's probably
bigger opportunity in the suppliers and
and the uh the dealers that are
riskadjusted better better investments
but there's a lot of stuff and a lot lot
to work on the automaker side as well.
>> So even if you're still a domestic
focused investor saying you're not
necessarily being left out of this kind
of this this this next hundred years of
the of of how the auto industry will
evolve.
>> Absolutely not. To really make it
simple, if you're a dealer that owns one
or two stores in the United States and
you're running a really good business,
you not only need to understand what's
going on in your market and with your
your automaker customers, but you also
really need to zoom out, understand
what's happening on a global basis
because that is that glob that global
competition is impacting the automakers
that you're selling vehicles for. So
everybody needs to be fully aware u
about this whether you're making a very
small local investment or you're making
a global investment in the industry is
is is just a global industry right now
and there's no way to bifrocate it.
There's differences between markets,
power trains and all that but it's it's
a glo it's a global you're making a
global investment.
>> Interesting. All right we're going to
take a quick break and when we come back
one last question for John Murphy of HEG
Partners. [music]
>> Welcome back. We've got one last big
question for John Murphy of HG Partners.
John, with the $7,500 EV tax credit
coming to an end at the end of
September, are we going to see a
renaissance for the internal combustion
engine, is that going to be the vehicle
of the future, or is this just a speed
bump on the long road to EV dominance?
>> So, um, I might use a different period
in in history and call it the ice age
cometh. Uh, right. So, the internal
combustion engine cometh. Um, because
yes, I do think cometh back.
>> Yeah, cometh back. Yeah, it um I think
for the next few years uh next three
years at least uh we're going to shift
back in that direction in a significant
way. And I think what you're going to
see over time is a more measured and
rational approach by automakers to help
solve the environmental issues um the
auto industry is is involved in in some
case cases causes. Um and we're going to
see the hybridization of powertrain
which is something that is much more
palatable to the consumer in the United
States. Uh and if you were to look at
you know some products like a Toyota
Camry that gets 52 m per gallon because
it's just a hybrid. um very rational,
inexpensive uh vehicle relative to to
others. Um that's great transportation,
but I think you're going to see that in
the large trucks uh at GM and Ford and
Stalantis. And you're going to solve the
problem in a in a more practical way.
Toyota's got a very interesting stat.
It's called the 1690 rule. So the 1690
rule is for all the precious metals and
everything else that needs to go into an
EV, they can make six plug-in hybrids or
they can make 90 regular parallel, you
know, hybrids like a like a Prius or
like what I just mentioned in the Camry.
those 90 um hybrids save 43 times the
CO2 as the one EV. So it's 90 cars
versus one for sure. So it's not
necessarily a super fair comparison, but
it is it shows that if you do something
that is more practical that the consumer
will accept holistically. They don't
have to change their driving patterns or
their life. You can actually have a huge
impact on the environment in a way
that's as opposed to sort of this
revolution that EVs uh have been set up
to to to really be and the consumer's
just not ready for them.
>> Interesting. Well, John Murphy, thanks
for joining us.
>> Thanks so much for having me. It's been
a blast.
[music]
There was like a business where you
where where like people who left New
York or moved away. It's like you could
order like Brooklyn, you could order
dirt from New York to like to like your
house and like your
>> kids something like that. Yeah. Yeah.
>> So to this day I say anytime somebody
somebody gets dirt, you know, people pay
good money for that dirt.
>> They do.